\input texinfo
@setfilename vcomplete.info
@settitle Vcomplete User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en

@copying
@quotation
Copyright @copyright{} 2021-2022 Daniel Semyonov

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms of
the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Vcomplete: (Vcomplete). Visual completions.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Vcomplete User Manual
@subtitle for version 1.2.
@author Daniel Semyonov
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Vcomplete User Manual

Vcomplete provides a minor mode enhancing the default completion list
buffer, providing visual aids for selecting completions.

@noindent
This manual is for Vcomplete version 1.2.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installation::
* Usage::
* Customization::
* Keystroke Index::
* Command Index::
* Function Index::
* Variable Index::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* Installing a release::
* Installing from the Git repository::

Customization

* Completion commands::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Vcomplete provides a minor mode enhancing the default completion list
buffer, providing visual aids for selecting completions. It's designed
to build upon the default completion system, instead of replacing
it. As such, it works both when completing in a minibuffer and in
normal buffers.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

Vcomplete can be installed from NonGNU ELPA:

@table @asis
@item @kbd{M-x package-install RET vcomplete RET}
@end table

@menu
* Installing a release::
* Installing from the Git repository::
@end menu

@node Installing a release
@section Installing a release

Simply download a release (from
<https://dsemy.com/projects/vcomplete>), and install it:

@table @asis
@item @kbd{M-x package-install-file RET /path/to/download/vcomplete-VERSION.tar RET}
@end table

@node Installing from the Git repository
@section Installing from the Git repository

Clone the repository and build the package archive:

@example
$ git clone https://git.sr.ht/~dsemy/vcomplete
$ cd vcomplete
$ make
@end example

Install the package:

@table @asis
@item @kbd{M-x package-install-file RET /path/to/clone/vcomplete-VERSION.tar RET}
@end table

@node Usage
@chapter Usage

It is recommended for @code{vcomplete-mode} to be enabled:

@cindex vcomplete-mode
@table @asis
@item @kbd{M-x vcomplete-mode RET}
You can also add @code{(vcomplete-mode)} to your init file, instead.
@end table

When @code{vcomplete-mode} is enabled, the @code{*Completions*} buffer
appears and updates automatically (by default), and the completion at
point in the @code{*Completions*} buffer is highlighted automatically.

The following commands are also made available when completion is in
progress:

@kindex C-n
@cindex vcomplete-next-completion
@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-n}
Select the next displayed completion
(@code{vcomplete-next-completion}).  This command moves point in the
@code{*Completions*} buffer to the next available completion, and
highlights it. This command may be used to advance multiple
completions at a time with a prefix argument.
@end table

@kindex C-p
@cindex vcomplete-prev-completion
@table @asis
@item @kbd{C-p}
Select the previous displayed completion
(@code{vcomplete-prev-completion}).  This command moves point in the
@code{*Completions*} buffer to the previous available completion, and
highlights it. This command may be used to advance multiple
completions at a time with a prefix argument.
@end table

@kindex M-RET
@cindex vcomplete-choose-completion
@table @asis
@item @kbd{M-RET}
Choose the currently highlighted completion in the
@code{*Completions*} buffer (@code{vcomplete-choose-completion}).
@end table

You may use these commands without enabling @code{vcomplete-mode}
(although they won't be bound by default).
@xref{Completion commands} for information regarding defining new
commands.

@node Customization
@chapter Customization

All customization, except for defining custom completion commands can
be done through the customize interface:

@table @asis
@item @kbd{M-x customize-group RET vcomplete RET}
@end table

@defopt vcomplete-auto-update
Whether the @code{*Completions*} buffer should open and update
automatically. Non-nil means automatically open and
update. Otherwise, operate according to
@code{completion-auto-help}. By default, @code{t} is used. Note that
with @code{completions-detailed} (introduced in Emacs 28) enabled, the
@code{*Completions*} buffer takes much more time to display. This is
also true for other ``annotation providers'' such as the Marginalia
package. Consider disabling them or this option on slow computers.
@end defopt

@defopt vcomplete-search-range
Range of search for a @code{*Completions*} window during completion.
A value of @code{t} means consider all windows on all frames,
@code{visible} means consider all windows on all visible frames,
@code{0} (the number zero) means consider all windows on all visible
and iconified frames and any other value means consider only the
currently selected frame. By default, @code{visible} is used.
@end defopt

@menu
* Completion commands::
@end menu

@node Completion commands
@section Completion commands

Completion commands are used to perform actions while completing. They
are normal commands (interactive functions) which are bound to a key
sequence in @code{vcomplete-command-map}.

@defopt vcomplete-no-update-commands
List of commands which shouldn't cause the @code{*Completions*} buffer
to update.
@end defopt

@defvar vcomplete-command-map
Key map which holds key bindings to completion commands. This key map
should be available whenever completion is initiated.
@end defvar

@defun vcomplete-current-completion pos
Get the completion candidate at POS.
The completion candidate is returned as a list of the form:
@example
(COMPLETION-STRING . (BEGINNING . END))
@end example
If no completion is found, this function returns nil. Note that this
function throws an error when the major mode of the buffer from which
it is called isn't derived from @code{completion-list-mode}.
@end defun

@defmac vcomplete-with-completions-buffer body...
Evaluate BODY with the @code{*Completions*} buffer temporarily
current.  While evaluating BODY, BUFFER and WINDOW are locally bound
to the @code{*Completions*} buffer and window respectively. This macro
can be used to easily manipulate or access the contents of the
@code{*Completions*} buffer. If there is no @code{*Completions*}
buffer or no window displaying it BODY isn't executed.
@end defmac

@node Keystroke Index
@appendix Keystroke Index

@printindex ky

@node Command Index
@appendix Command Index

@printindex cp

@node Function Index
@appendix Function Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@appendix Variable Index

@printindex vr

@bye
